KBI 0009:  ingesting data into a dataset clone (#37)
psychoinformatics-de/knowledge-base: kbi/0009/index.rst

.. index::
   single: <topic>; <subtopic>

.. highlight:: console

KBI0009: How to re-ingest file content in a dataset clone
=========================================================

:authors: Adina Wagner <adina.wagner@t-online.de>

> :discussion: <link>

Author: ```suggestion
:discussion: https://github.com/psychoinformatics-de/knowledge-base/pull/37
```

:keywords: file content; copy; re-ingest file content
:version: datalad 0.18.3, git annex 10.20221003

Typically, data transfer for data in DataLad datasets works best when
relying on the transport mechanisms DataLad and its underlying tools
provide:
To obtain a copy of the data in a dataset in location A in a different
location B, one can clone the dataset from A to B and retrieve its contents.

This KBI, though, outlines a rather unusual different method:

> Given that the dataset in A contains lots of data, and given that a complete
> **copy of the data already exists outside of a DataLad dataset in location B**,
> a plain clone from the dataset in A to B can be used to re-ingest the data.
> The result is identical to having cloned and retrieved data, but without
> duplicating the data transfer and instead using the pre-existing copy of the data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a dataset at location A contains lots of data, and given that a complete
**copy of the data already exists outside of a DataLad dataset in location B**,
a plain clone from the dataset in A to B can be used to re-ingest the data.
The result is identical to having cloned and retrieved data, but without
duplicating the data transfer and instead using the pre-existing copy of the data.
```

Example workflow
----------------

> Lets set up a toy example dataset at location A::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's set up a toy example dataset at location A::
```

    # on one system
    $ datalad create location-A
    create(ok): /tmp/location-A (dataset)

> Let's put some files inside. In this toy example its only a single small file,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's put some files inside. In this toy example it is only a single small file,
```

of files::

    $ datalad run -d /tmp/location-A 'dd if=/dev/urandom bs=1M count=10 of={dspath}/big.dat'
    [INFO   ] == Command start (output follows) =====
    10+0 records in
    10+0 records out
    10485760 bytes (10 MB, 10 MiB) copied, 0.0360015 s, 291 MB/s
    [INFO   ] == Command exit (modification check follows) =====
    run(ok): /tmp/location-A (dataset) [dd if=/dev/urandom bs=1M count=10 of=/tm...]
    add(ok): big.dat (file)
    save(ok): . (dataset)

Next, create a clone on the target system::

    $ datalad clone location-A:/tmp/location-A location-B
    install(ok): /tmp/location-B (dataset)

The clone knows about the file and its identity, but has not yet retrieved its
file contents::

    $ cd location-B
    $ ls -l .
    lrwxrwxrwx 1 adina adina 130 Apr 21 12:51 big.dat -> .git/annex/objects/1G/4J/MD5E-s10485760--49c360327aabc60e0b75e9bff4bee060.dat/MD5E-s10485760--49c360327aabc60e0b75e9bff4bee060.dat

Pay attention what the current commit SHA is to later easily identify any data
changes::

   $ git log -1 --pretty=oneline | cat
   ba083bf39f87bc97c60d70b1ff0c69e41cbf28a2 [DATALAD RUNCMD] dd if=/dev/urandom bs=1M count=10 of=/ho...

> We can now copy or move over the files from a pre-existing copy on location-B into the worktree of the dataset::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can now copy or move over the files from a pre-existing copy into the worktree of the dataset::
```

   $ cp --remove-destination /place/with/copy /tmp/location-B

``datalad status`` will detect a change, because this replaced the symlink provided by git-annex with the actual data file::

   $ datalad status
   modified: big.dat (symlink)

The only thing left to finish the ingestion is a ``datalad save``.
If everything works as expected, i.e. the data copied is actually the data that
is expected/tracked, no new commit will be created::

    $ datalad save
    add(ok): big.dat (file)
    action summary:
      add (ok: 1)
      save (notneeded: 1)
    $ datalad status
    nothing to save, working tree clean
    $ git log -1 --pretty=oneline | cat
    ba083bf39f87bc97c60d70b1ff0c69e41cbf28a2 [DATALAD RUNCMD] dd if=/dev/urandom bs=1M count=10 of=/ho...

> If the commit Shasum differs from the previously seen Shasum now, though, the
> data that has been ingested isn't identical to the data originally tracked, for
> example due to accidental corruption.
> 
> 
> 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the commit SHA differs from the previously seen SHA now, though, the
data that has been ingested is not identical to the data originally tracked, for
example due to accidental corruption.
```

Align with label used above.
